---
layout: post
title: What does a Data Scientist do?
---

The Science Council (https://sciencecouncil.org) defines a scientist as "someone who systematically gathers and uses research as evidence, to make hypotheses and test them, to gain and share understanding and knowledge." By this definition, a data scientist is a scientist in every sense of the word, but with research tools that distinguishes the individual from a traditional scientist. These sets of unique research tools include the ability to gather massive amount of data, clean, transform, model and visualize the data, and tell a compelling story to help both individuals and organizations solve problems and make sound decisions.  Another distinction is that, similar to statisticians, data scientists also "get to play in everyone's backyard", to borrow a popular quote by John Wilder Tukey, just as long as they understand the rules of the game being played. As such, data scientists need subject matter expertise to understand the nuances and relevance of the data being worked on.

Apart from having domain knowledge, the two other pillars/knowledge areas a data scientist must have are statistical/analytics, and computer programming (especially languages like Java, Python, R, SAS and SQL). These 3 foundational stones provide the data scientist with the competency needed to be able to solve business (or scientific) problems by developing models, algorithms, and providing insights from data analysis. In some regard, data scientists could be viewed as statisticians, however, both roles are not quite the same.

For instance, the scale of the data that data scientists and statistician work on, and the means of data collection, differ significantly. Statisticians usually rely on designed experiments, surveys and polls for small scale, usually structured data collection. On the other hand, data scientists collect numbers, texts, audio, visuals, mobile data, etc. ,usually measured in scales that could be as great as exabytes. As a result, data scientists typically spend considerable time cleaning and transforming data prior to analysis. Statisticians are often focused on establishing a single model that best fits the data and quantifies uncertainties. Data scientists rather focus on using machine learning to create models having the best predictive accuracy possible. Both roles use processes that closely follow the Scientific Method (formulate a research goal, design the study, collect data, etc.), the means in which data scientists go about this tends to be easier to digest by many more people. Despite these differences, both roles are singularly focused on distilling knowledge from data. They  also have some knowledge of statistical concepts in common, even though statisticians tend to have a deeper understanding of theoretical aspects of statistics. Both roles also rely on computational skills and power to achieve their goals, with data scientists have considerable greater programming skill sets. Also, both roles need to be effective communicators especially to stakeholders.

In my current role as a material scientist, I can relate more to being a statistician. I routinely use traditional statistical concepts like ANOVA tables, p-values,margin of error etc. to differentiate the impact of different materials/additives on performance characteristics and composition of engineered goods. However, I would like to gain some of the skill sets relevant to data scientists to be able to better predict measurements like the service life and failure modes of materials without always needing to carry out expensive and time costly experiments.


References:

https://medium.com/odscjournal/data-scientists-versus-statisticians-8ea146b7a47f
https://mixpanel.com/blog/2016/03/30/this-is-the-difference-between-statistics-and-data-science/
https://www.simplilearn.com/data-science-vs-data-analytics-vs-machine-learning-article
https://www.springboard.com/blog/machine-learning-engineer-vs-data-scientist/
